Love’s Labour’s Lost
by William Shakespeare

ACT V
SCENE I. The King of Navarre’s park

SCENE I. The King of Navarre’s park


Enter Holofernes, Sir Nathaniel and Dull.

HOLOFERNES.
_Satis quod sufficit._

NATHANIEL.
I praise God for you, sir. Your reasons at dinner have been sharp and
sententious, pleasant without scurrility, witty without affection,
audacious without impudency, learned without opinion, and strange
without heresy. I did converse this _quondam_ day with a companion of
the King’s, who is intituled, nominated, or called, Don Adriano de
Armado.

HOLOFERNES.
_Novi hominem tanquam te._ His humour is lofty, his discourse
peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gait majestical
and his general behaviour vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is too
picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were, too peregrinate,
as I may call it.

NATHANIEL.
A most singular and choice epithet.

[_Draws out his table-book._]

HOLOFERNES.
He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his
argument. I abhor such fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and
point-devise companions, such rackers of orthography, as to speak
“dout” _sine_ “b”, when he should say “doubt”, “det” when he should
pronounce “debt”—_d, e, b, t_, not _d, e, t_. He clepeth a calf “cauf”,
half “hauf”; neighbour _vocatur_ “nebour”, neigh abbreviated “ne”. This
is abhominable, which he would call “abominable”. It insinuateth me of
insanie. _Ne intelligis, domine?_ To make frantic, lunatic.

NATHANIEL.
_Laus Deo, bone intelligo._

HOLOFERNES.
_Bone? Bone_ for _bene?_ Priscian a little scratched; ’twill serve.

Enter Armado, Moth and Costard.

NATHANIEL.
_Videsne quis venit?_

HOLOFERNES.
_Video, et gaudeo._

ARMADO.
_Chirrah!_

HOLOFERNES.
_Quare_ “chirrah”, not “sirrah”?

ARMADO.
Men of peace, well encountered.

HOLOFERNES.
Most military sir, salutation.

MOTH.
[_Aside to Costard_.] They have been at a great feast of languages and
stolen the scraps.

COSTARD.
O, they have lived long on the almsbasket of words. I marvel thy master
hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou art not so long by the head as
_honorificabilitudinitatibus_. Thou art easier swallowed than a
flap-dragon.

MOTH.
Peace! The peal begins.

ARMADO.
[_To Holofernes_.] Monsieur, are you not lettered?

MOTH.
Yes, yes, he teaches boys the hornbook. What is _a, b_, spelt backward
with the horn on his head?

HOLOFERNES.
_Ba, pueritia_, with a horn added.

MOTH.
_Ba_, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.

HOLOFERNES.
_Quis, quis_, thou consonant?

MOTH.
The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or the fifth, if I.

HOLOFERNES.
I will repeat them: _a, e, i_—

MOTH.
The sheep. The other two concludes it: _o, u_.

ARMADO.
Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet touch, a quick
venue of wit! Snip, snap, quick and home! It rejoiceth my intellect.
True wit!

MOTH.
Offered by a child to an old man—which is wit-old.

HOLOFERNES.
What is the figure? What is the figure?

MOTH.
Horns.

HOLOFERNES.
Thou disputes like an infant. Go whip thy gig.

MOTH.
Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about your infamy _unum
cita_. A gig of a cuckold’s horn.

COSTARD.
An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it to buy
gingerbread. Hold, there is the very remuneration I had of thy master,
thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion. O, an the
heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my bastard, what a joyful
father wouldst thou make me! Go to, thou hast it _ad dunghill_, at the
fingers’ ends, as they say.

HOLOFERNES.
O, I smell false Latin! _Dunghill_ for _unguem_.

ARMADO.
Arts-man, preambulate. We will be singuled from the barbarous. Do you
not educate youth at the charge-house on the top of the mountain?

HOLOFERNES.
Or _mons_, the hill.

ARMADO.
At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.

HOLOFERNES.
I do, _sans question_.

ARMADO.
Sir, it is the King’s most sweet pleasure and affection to congratulate
the Princess at her pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the
rude multitude call the afternoon.

HOLOFERNES.
The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable, congruent, and
measurable for the afternoon. The word is well culled, chose, sweet,
and apt, I do assure you, sir, I do assure.

ARMADO.
Sir, the King is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do assure ye,
very good friend. For what is inward between us, let it pass. I do
beseech thee, remember thy courtesy; I beseech thee, apparel thy head.
And among other importunate and most serious designs, and of great
import indeed, too—but let that pass. For I must tell thee it will
please his Grace, by the world, sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder
and with his royal finger thus dally with my excrement, with my
mustachio. But, sweet heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no
fable! Some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart
to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world. But
let that pass. The very all of all is—but, sweet heart, I do implore
secrecy—that the King would have me present the Princess, sweet chuck,
with some delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or antic, or
firework. Now, understanding that the curate and your sweet self are
good at such eruptions and sudden breaking-out of mirth, as it were, I
have acquainted you withal, to the end to crave your assistance.

HOLOFERNES.
Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies. Sir Nathaniel, as
concerning some entertainment of time, some show in the posterior of
this day, to be rendered by our assistance, the King’s command, and
this most gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before the
Princess, I say, none so fit as to present the Nine Worthies.

NATHANIEL.
Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?

HOLOFERNES.
Joshua, yourself; myself; and this gallant gentleman, Judas Maccabaeus.
This swain, because of his great limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the
Great; the page, Hercules.

ARMADO.
Pardon, sir; error. He is not quantity enough for that Worthy’s thumb;
he is not so big as the end of his club.

HOLOFERNES.
Shall I have audience? He shall present Hercules in minority. His enter
and exit shall be strangling a snake; and I will have an apology for
that purpose.

MOTH.
An excellent device! So, if any of the audience hiss, you may cry “Well
done, Hercules, now thou crushest the snake!” That is the way to make
an offence gracious, though few have the grace to do it.

ARMADO.
For the rest of the Worthies?

HOLOFERNES.
I will play three myself.

MOTH.
Thrice-worthy gentleman!

ARMADO.
Shall I tell you a thing?

HOLOFERNES.
We attend.

ARMADO.
We will have, if this fadge not, an antic. I beseech you, follow.

HOLOFERNES.
_Via_, goodman Dull! Thou has spoken no word all this while.

DULL.
Nor understood none neither, sir.

HOLOFERNES.
_Allons!_ we will employ thee.

DULL.
I’ll make one in a dance, or so; or I will play on the tabor to the
Worthies, and let them dance the hay.

HOLOFERNES.
Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away.

[_Exeunt._]
