ACT IV
SCENE III. A room in the prison

Enter Jailer, Wooer and Doctor.

DOCTOR.
Her distraction is more at some time of the moon, than at other some,
is it not?

JAILER.
She is continually in a harmless distemper, sleeps little, altogether
without appetite, save often drinking, dreaming of another world, and a
better; and what broken piece of matter soe’er she’s about, the name
Palamon lards it, that she farces every business withal, fits it to
every question.

Enter Jailer’s Daughter.

Look where she comes; you shall perceive her behaviour.

DAUGHTER.
I have forgot it quite. The burden on ’t was “Down-a, down-a,” and
penned by no worse man than Geraldo, Emilia’s schoolmaster. He’s as
fantastical, too, as ever he may go upon’s legs, for in the next world
will Dido see Palamon, and then will she be out of love with Æneas.

DOCTOR.
What stuff’s here? Poor soul!

JAILER.
Even thus all day long.

DAUGHTER.
Now for this charm that I told you of: you must bring a piece of silver
on the tip of your tongue, or no ferry. Then if it be your chance to
come where the blessed spirits are, there’s a sight now! We maids that
have our livers perished, cracked to pieces with love, we shall come
there, and do nothing all day long but pick flowers with Proserpine.
Then will I make Palamon a nosegay; then let him mark me—then.

DOCTOR.
How prettily she’s amiss! Note her a little further.

DAUGHTER.
Faith, I’ll tell you, sometime we go to barley-break, we of the
blessed. Alas, ’tis a sore life they have i’ th’ other place—such
burning, frying, boiling, hissing, howling, chattering, cursing—O, they
have shrewd measure; take heed! If one be mad, or hang or drown
themselves, thither they go; Jupiter bless us! And there shall we be
put in a cauldron of lead and usurers’ grease, amongst a whole million
of cutpurses, and there boil like a gammon of bacon that will never be
enough.

DOCTOR.
How her brain coins!

DAUGHTER.
Lords and courtiers that have got maids with child, they are in this
place. They shall stand in fire up to the navel and in ice up to the
heart, and there th’ offending part burns and the deceiving part
freezes. In troth, a very grievous punishment, as one would think, for
such a trifle. Believe me, one would marry a leprous witch to be rid on
’t, I’ll assure you.

DOCTOR.
How she continues this fancy! ’Tis not an engraffed madness, but a most
thick, and profound melancholy.

DAUGHTER.
To hear there a proud lady and a proud city wife howl together! I were
a beast an I’d call it good sport. One cries “O this smoke!” th’ other,
“This fire!”; one cries, “O, that ever I did it behind the arras!” and
then howls; th’ other curses a suing fellow and her garden house.

[_Sings._]
    _I will be true, my stars, my fate, &c._

[_Exit Jailer’s Daughter._]

JAILER.
What think you of her, sir?

DOCTOR.
I think she has a perturbed mind, which I cannot minister to.

JAILER.
Alas, what then?

DOCTOR.
Understand you she ever affected any man ere she beheld Palamon?

JAILER.
I was once, sir, in great hope she had fixed her liking on this
gentleman, my friend.

WOOER.
I did think so too, and would account I had a great penn’orth on’t, to
give half my state, that both she and I at this present stood
unfeignedly on the same terms.

DOCTOR.
That intemperate surfeit of her eye hath distempered the other senses.
They may return and settle again to execute their preordained
faculties, but they are now in a most extravagant vagary. This you must
do: confine her to a place where the light may rather seem to steal in
than be permitted. Take upon you, young sir, her friend, the name of
Palamon; say you come to eat with her, and to commune of love. This
will catch her attention, for this her mind beats upon; other objects
that are inserted ’tween her mind and eye become the pranks and
friskins of her madness. Sing to her such green songs of love as she
says Palamon hath sung in prison. Come to her stuck in as sweet flowers
as the season is mistress of, and thereto make an addition of some
other compounded odours which are grateful to the sense. All this shall
become Palamon, for Palamon can sing, and Palamon is sweet and every
good thing. Desire to eat with her, carve her, drink to her, and still
among intermingle your petition of grace and acceptance into her
favour. Learn what maids have been her companions and play-feres, and
let them repair to her with Palamon in their mouths, and appear with
tokens, as if they suggested for him. It is a falsehood she is in,
which is with falsehoods to be combated. This may bring her to eat, to
sleep, and reduce what’s now out of square in her into their former law
and regiment. I have seen it approved, how many times I know not, but
to make the number more I have great hope in this. I will, between the
passages of this project, come in with my appliance. Let us put it in
execution and hasten the success, which, doubt not, will bring forth
comfort.

[_Exeunt._]
